STS Server documentation and troubleshooting (#9543)
noobaa/noobaa-core: docs/dev_guide/STS Server.md

Instead of sharing long-lived access keys, an account owner can configure a **role** that other accounts can temporarily assume. The assuming account receives short-lived credentials that grant the permissions of the role account for a limited time window. 

---

## Overview

### Feature use cases

- **Delegated access**: Grant users access to buckets they don't normally have permission to reach, without sharing permanent credentials.
- **Temporary access**: Credentials expire automatically (default 1 hour, configurable 15 min - 12 hours), reducing risk from credential leakage.
- **CI/CD and automation**: Issue short-lived credentials to pipelines or automated processes that need bucket access for a limited task.
- **AWS compatibility**: S3 clients that already support STS (e.g., the AWS CLI, AWS SDKs) can use the same workflow against NooBaa.

---

## Scope

**In scope:**
- Role management - assign/remove role via NooBaa CLI.
- NooBaa STS endpoint/Service/Route supporting `AssumeRole` operation (with NooBaa being the identity provider).
- S3 functionality when a user assumes a role (temporary credentials).

> **Out of scope:**

Reviewer: Is it clear that it is supported only in Noobaa in ODF only?
If you want, you can mention that it is not supported in NC yet.

> - Role management via the IAM endpoint itself (only via CLI).

Reviewer: Minor - so it would be clear what CLI (there's AWS CLI).
```suggestion
- Role management via the IAM endpoint itself (only via NooBaa CLI).
```

> - Integration with external Identity Providers (LDAP) - POC.

Reviewer: Do you need the POC?
```suggestion
- Integration with external Identity Providers (LDAP).
```

Author: yes

---

## Technical Details
- [STS Server](#sts-server)
- [Role configuration](#role-configuration)
- [Kubernetes Resources](#kubernetes-resources)
- [Role Management](#role-management)
- [Assume Role Operation](#assume-role-operation)
---

## Technical Details

### STS Server

STS server runs inside the **noobaa-endpoint** pods - the same pods that serve S3 and IAM. Each protocol listens on a different port:

> | Protocol | HTTP Port | HTTPS Port | Purpose |

Reviewer: Worth adding a note/disclaimer in case those ports are changed.

|----------|-----------|------------|---------|
| S3 | 6001 | 6443 | Object storage API |
| STS | -- | 7443 | Security Token Service |
| IAM | -- | 13443 | Identity and Access Management |

---

### Role configuration
#### What is a Role in NooBaa?

A role in NooBaa is a configuration (`role_config`) attached to an **account** that defines:
- **`role_name`**: A human-readable name for the role.
- **`assume_role_policy`**: A policy that specifies which accounts are allowed to assume this role and under what conditions.

> Unlike AWS where roles are standalone entities, in NooBaa a role is a property of an account. When another user assumes this role, they gain the permissions of that account for the duration of the session.

Reviewer: It was described as operation between accounts
```suggestion
Unlike AWS where roles are standalone entities, in NooBaa a role is a property of an account. When another account assumes this role, they gain the permissions of that account for the duration of the session.
```

---

> ### Role in NooBaa DB

Reviewer: I think this section, on the one hand, is very clear, but on the other hand, it might be hard to maintain over time. Worth adding a comment, it was taken from version 4.22 or a general disclaimer about code changes.

**Account schema** (`src/server/system_services/schemas/account_schema.js`):
```javascript
role_config: {
    $ref: 'common_api#/definitions/role_config'
}
```

---

### Role in NooBaa DB

**`role_config` definition** (`src/api/common_api.js`):
```javascript
role_config: {
    type: 'object',
    required: ['role_name', 'assume_role_policy'],
    properties: {
        role_name: { type: 'string' },
        assume_role_policy: { $ref: '#/definitions/assume_role_policy' }
    }
}
```

---

### Role in NooBaa DB

**`assume_role_policy` definition** (`src/api/common_api.js`):
```javascript
assume_role_policy: {
    type: 'object',
    required: ['statement'],
    properties: {
        version: { type: 'string' },
        statement: {
            type: 'array',
            items: {
                type: 'object',
                required: ['effect', 'action', 'principal'],
                properties: {
                    effect: { enum: ['allow', 'deny'], type: 'string' },
                    action: { type: 'array', items: { type: 'string' } },
                    principal: { type: 'array', items: { $ref: '#/definitions/email' } }
                }
            }
        }
    }

> }

Author: what is your source to 'but the API schema allows Allow|Deny and supports either string or array. '?

```

---
### Role in NooBaa DB

**Example role_config stored on an account:**
```json
{
  "role_name": "AllowDevOpsAccess",
  "assume_role_policy": {
    "version": "2012-10-17",
    "statement": [
      {
        "effect": "allow",
        "action": ["sts:AssumeRole"],
        "principal": ["devops@example.com", "ci-bot@example.com"]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

---

> ### Role ARN format

Reviewer: It does not align with the AWS ARN convention - I think we should add a comment about it (if we have a reason, it can also be added).

When assuming a role, the caller must provide ARN that should be of the following format - 

```
arn:aws:sts::<access-key-of-role-account>:role/<role_name>
```
---

### Kubernetes resources

- **Service**: `sts` (LoadBalancer, port 443 -> targetPort 7443)
- **Route** (OpenShift): `sts` route with TLS reencrypt termination
- **TLS Certificate**: `noobaa-sts-serving-cert` secret, auto-generated by OpenShift serving cert annotation
- **Pod**: `noobaa-endpoint` deployment, which also serves S3 and IAM

> 

Reviewer: You can add a link so one can see it in noobaa-operator repository.

---

### Role Management

Role management is done via the **NooBaa CLI**.

> Roles can be assigned to or removed from an existing account. Account can be created as well by NooBaa CLI/CR.

Reviewer: I'm not sure it is needed - 
```suggestion
Roles can be assigned to or removed from an existing account.
```

> #### CLI Commands

Reviewer: You can attach the outputs

**Assign a role to an `existing account`:**

```bash

> noobaa sts assign-role --email <account-email> \

Reviewer: You can add a comment how can the admin find the account-email.

>   --role_config '{"role_name":"MyRole","assume_role_policy":{"version":"2012-10-17","statement":[{"effect":"allow","action":["sts:AssumeRole"],"principal":["assumer@example.com"]}]}}'

Reviewer: You wanted to have a placeholder or example?
It is mixed now - account 1 <account-email> account 2 `"assumer@example.com"`

- [Key debug Log Patterns](#key-debug-log-patterns-to-search-for)
- [Endpoint Pod Logs Search](#enable-debug-logging)
- [STS Service and Route Status Check](#sts-service-and-route-status-check)
- [Inspect Account and Role Configuration](#inspect-account-and-role-configuration)
- [Common Issues and Solutions](#common-issues-and-solutions)
---

## Troubleshooting

### Common STS Error Codes

| Error Code | HTTP Code | Meaning | Common Cause |
|-----------|-----------|---------|--------------|
| `AccessDeniedException` | 400 | Not authorized | Wrong credentials, invalid signature, principal not in assume_role_policy |
| `ExpiredToken` | 400 | Session token expired | Token TTL passed; client needs to call AssumeRole again |

---

## Troubleshooting

### Common STS Error Codes

| Error Code | HTTP Code | Meaning | Common Cause |
|-----------|-----------|---------|--------------|
| `InvalidClientTokenId` | 403 | Bad access key or token | Access key not found, invalid JWT signature |
| `InvalidParameterValue` | 400 | Bad parameter | Invalid duration value |
| `ValidationError` | 400 | Input constraint failure | Duration out of range (< 900s or > 43200s) |

---

> ### Troubleshooting

Reviewer: Should be in level 2, right?
``` suggestion
## Troubleshooting
```

#### Enable Debug Logging

1. Set the debug level on the endpoint pods:

```bash

> kubectl edit cm -n openshift-storage noobaa-config

Reviewer: Inconsistency? Here, the namespace is `openshift-storage` and below it is with a placeholder `<your-noobaa-namespace>`.

- `assume_role_policy: action fit?` - Logs each action being evaluated.
- `assume_role_policy: is_statements_fit` - Logs action and principle policy statement evaluation result.
- `JWT VERIFY FAILED` - Logged when session token verification fails.

--- 
#### Endpoint Pod Logs Search

```bash
# Filter for STS-related messages only
kubectl logs -l noobaa-s3=noobaa -n <namespace> --tail=500 | grep -iE "sts|assume_role|session_token" | less -R

# Filter for STS errors specifically
kubectl logs -l noobaa-s3=noobaa -n <namespace> --tail=500 | grep -i "STS ERROR" | less -R

# Filter for JWT/token issues
kubectl logs -l noobaa-s3=noobaa -n <namespace> --tail=500 | grep -iE "JWT VERIFY|TokenExpired|ExpiredToken|InvalidClientTokenId" | less -R

# Check logs from a specific endpoint pod
kubectl logs <ENDPOINT_POD> -n <namespace> --tail=200 -f | less -R
```

---

#### STS Service and Route Status Check

```bash
# Verify STS service and route (Openshift) exists and has endpoints
kubectl get svc sts -n <namespace>
oc get route sts -n <namespace>

# Get the STS endpoint URL from noobaa status
# Look for the "#- STS Addresses -#" section in the output
noobaa status -n <namespace>
```

---

> #### Inspect Account and Role Configuration

Reviewer: I see only the account configuration commands.
```suggestion
#### Inspect Account Configuration
```

Author: role is a field in account

```

---

## Documentation Links

### NooBaa / Red Hat Documentation

- [Red Hat ODF 4.20 - Using MCG STS to Assume Role](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_data_foundation/4.20/html/managing_hybrid_and_multicloud_resources/using-the-multi-cloud-object-gateway-security-token-service-to-assume-the-role-of-another-user_rhodf)

### AWS Documentation

- [AWS STS - Temporary Security Credentials](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/id_credentials_temp.html)
- [AWS STS API Reference - AssumeRole](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/STS/latest/APIReference/API_AssumeRole.html)
- [AWS STS API Reference - AssumeRoleWithWebIdentity](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/STS/latest/APIReference/API_AssumeRoleWithWebIdentity.html)
- [AWS STS Common Errors](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/STS/latest/APIReference/CommonErrors.html)
- [AWS IAM Roles](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/id_roles.html)

---

## Demo

### Prerequisites

- A running NooBaa deployment (on OpenShift/Kubernetes)
- Access to the NooBaa CLI (`noobaa`) -- installed via `noobaa-operator`
- AWS CLI v2 installed (`aws --version`)
- `jq` installed for JSON parsing

> - `oc` or `kubectl` access to the cluster namespace

Reviewer: I wasn't sure about the "access to the cluster namespace", suggesting a simpler definition:
```suggestion
- `oc` or `kubectl` command-line tool
```

```bash
# Construct the Role ARN using the assumed account's access key
export ROLE_ARN="arn:aws:sts::${ASSUMED_ACCESS_KEY}:role/DemoRole"
echo "Role ARN: ${ROLE_ARN}"

# Call AssumeRole using the assumer's credentials
ASSUME_ROLE_OUTPUT=$(AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=${ASSUMER_ACCESS_KEY} \
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=${ASSUMER_SECRET_KEY} \
aws --endpoint-url ${STS_ENDPOINT} --no-verify-ssl \
  sts assume-role \
  --role-arn "${ROLE_ARN}" \
  --role-session-name "demo-session" \
  --output json 2>&1)

echo "${ASSUME_ROLE_OUTPUT}" | jq .

# Extract the temporary credentials from the response
export TEMP_ACCESS_KEY=$(echo "${ASSUME_ROLE_OUTPUT}" | jq -r '.Credentials.AccessKeyId')
export TEMP_SECRET_KEY=$(echo "${ASSUME_ROLE_OUTPUT}" | jq -r '.Credentials.SecretAccessKey')
export TEMP_SESSION_TOKEN=$(echo "${ASSUME_ROLE_OUTPUT}" | jq -r '.Credentials.SessionToken')
export TEMP_EXPIRATION=$(echo "${ASSUME_ROLE_OUTPUT}" | jq -r '.Credentials.Expiration')

echo "Temp Access Key: ${TEMP_ACCESS_KEY}"
echo "Temp Expiration: ${TEMP_EXPIRATION}"
```
---
**Expected output:**
```json
{
    "Credentials": {
        "AccessKeyId": "abc123...",
        "SecretAccessKey": "xyz789...",

>         "SessionToken": "eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIs...",

Reviewer: I think you need EXAMPLE suffix for not getting InfoSec alerts

  --role-session-name "should-fail" 2>&1

# Expected: An error occurred (AccessDeniedException) ...
# Because outsider@demo.test is NOT in the assume_role_policy principal list
```
---
#### Step 12: Demonstrate System Owner Bypass

```bash
# The system owner (admin) can ALWAYS assume any role, even if not in the principal list
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=${ADMIN_ACCESS_KEY} \
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=${ADMIN_SECRET_KEY} \
aws --endpoint-url ${STS_ENDPOINT} --no-verify-ssl \
  sts assume-role \
  --role-arn "${ROLE_ARN}" \
  --role-session-name "admin-bypass" \
  --output json 2>&1 | jq .

# Expected: Success -- admin can always assume any role
```
---
### Demo Important Points

1. **Before STS**: The assumer cannot access the assumed account's bucket (Step 5).
2. **Role assignment**: The admin assigns a role policy specifying who can assume the role (Step 3).
3. **AssumeRole**: The assumer calls the STS endpoint and receives temporary credentials (Step 6).
4. **JWT inspection**: The session token is a standard JWT containing the temp creds and the role reference (Step 7).
5. **Temporary access**: Using the temp credentials + session token, the assumer can now access the bucket (Steps 8-9).

> 6. **Expiration**: After the token expires, access is automatically revoked -- no manual cleanup needed (Step 10).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. **Expiration**: After the token expires, access is automatically revoked - no manual cleanup needed (Step 10).
```

---

### Demo Important Points

7. **Access control**: Unauthorized accounts are rejected by the assume_role_policy (Step 11).
8. **System owner bypass**: The admin can always assume any role for emergency access (Step 12).
9. **Security**: Credentials are short-lived, not stored in the database, and the session token is a signed JWT that cannot be forged.

---

## Known Limitations

### Account Cache Delay

NooBaa caches account data in an in-memory LRU cache (`account_cache` in `src/sdk/object_sdk.js`) with a default TTL of **10 minutes** (`OBJECT_SDK_ACCOUNT_CACHE_EXPIRY_MS`). This means that changes to an account (e.g., role assignment/removal, access key updates, policy changes) may not take effect for up to 10 minutes on endpoint pods that have the old account data cached.

---

## Q&A

> ### Q-a: How does STS work from the moment a client does a PUT or GET to a NooBaa bucket?

Reviewer: I think numbers are clearer (Q-1, Q-2, ... than Q-a, Q-b,...).

2. **S3 endpoint receives the request** (port 6443 on noobaa-endpoint pod):
   - `http_utils.authorize_session_token()` detects the `X-Amz-Security-Token` header and decodes/verifies the JWT. The JWT contains `{access_key (temp), secret_key (temp), assumed_role_access_key}`. If the JWT is expired, `ExpiredToken` is returned immediately.

---

3. **Credential swapping** in `signature_utils.authenticate_request_by_service()`:
   - `auth_token.access_key` is set to `assumed_role_access_key` (the role account's permanent access key).
   - `auth_token.temp_secret_key` is set to the temp secret key from the JWT.

4. **Account lookup**: The S3 endpoint loads the **role account** using `assumed_role_access_key` via `account_cache`.

5. **Signature verification**: The request's AWS signature is verified using the **temporary secret key** (not the role account's permanent secret). This confirms the client possesses the temp credentials that were issued.

---

> 6. **Authorization**: Bucket policies and IAM policies are evaluated against the **role account** (not the original assumer). The client effectively operates with the role account's permissions.

Reviewer: IAM policies are on users, I'm not sure you want it inside
```suggestion
6. **Authorization**: Bucket policies is evaluated against the **role account** (not the original assumer). The client effectively operates with the role account's permissions.
```

7. **S3 operation executes**: The PUT/GET/DELETE/etc. operation is carried out as if the role account made the request.

---
### Q-b: Which service/pod provides the STS endpoint?

> The **noobaa-endpoint** pods provide the STS endpoint.

Reviewer: I think here you can also refer to [Kubernetes resources](#kubernetes-resources)

- **Pod**: `noobaa-endpoint` deployment pods (selector: `noobaa-s3: <system-name>`)
- **Container port**: 7443 (HTTPS only)
- **Kubernetes Service**: `sts` (LoadBalancer, port 443 -> 7443)
- **OpenShift Route**: `sts` (TLS reencrypt)
- **TLS certificate**: `noobaa-sts-serving-cert` secret
---

### Q-c: Where are the roles stored?

See [Technical Details - Role configuration](#role-configuration)

---

### Q-d: How to troubleshoot STS?

See [Section 3: Troubleshooting](#3-troubleshooting) for full details.

---

### Q-e: How is access control done from an S3 client request? How does STS play here?

**Normal S3 request (without STS):**

> The client signs every request with its **permanent** `AccessKeyId` and `SecretAccessKey` using AWS Signature V4. NooBaa:

Reviewer: We still support AWS Signature V2; I don't know if it matters here.

1. Extracts the `AccessKeyId` from the `Authorization` header.
2. Looks up the account by that access key.
3. Retrieves the account's `SecretAccessKey`.
4. Recomputes the signature and compares it to the one in the request.
5. If matched, the request is authenticated as that account.
6. Bucket policies and IAM policies are evaluated against that account.

> 

Reviewer: I have an additional question (@karthikps97 raised it in the past) -
What should be the behavior if we run the API again? Should the previous credentials still be available?
If it is by design, it should be documented.

---
**S3 request with STS temporary credentials:**

The client signs with **temporary** `AccessKeyId` and `SecretAccessKey`, and additionally includes the `X-Amz-Security-Token` header (the JWT session token). NooBaa:

1. Detects the `X-Amz-Security-Token` header.
2. Decodes and verifies the JWT (checks signature and expiry).
3. Extracts from the JWT: `{temp_access_key, temp_secret_key, assumed_role_access_key}`.
4. **Swaps** the access key: instead of looking up the account by the temp access key (which doesn't exist in the database), it uses `assumed_role_access_key` to load the **role account**.
---

**S3 request with STS temporary credentials:**

5. Verifies the request signature using `temp_secret_key` (from the JWT, not from the database).

> 6. Evaluates bucket policies and IAM policies against the **role account**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Evaluates the bucket policy against the **role account**.
```
